# Forest Fires Industrial Mathematics
## Overview
This project is a an agent based model to simulate the spread of fire across a grid under various environmental conditions, including wind, rain, and varying vegetation densities.

## Features
### Environmental Factors.
  - Wind effects with directional control.
  - Rainfall to simulate suppression.
  - Varying vegetation densities affecting burn and growth rates.

  **NOTE**: We generate rain and density using Perlin noise and we use the following library [Salaxieb's Perlin noise Generator](https://github.com/salaxieb/perlin_noise/tree/master).

### Custom Visualisation Settings.
  - High, medium, or low-resolution grid options.
  - Personal image integration for custom grid backgrounds.

### Planes!
- Specify parameters of your plane in `settings.json` and watch it put out a fire!

## File Structure

```text
app/
├── perlin_noise/
│   ├── perlin_noise.py
│   ├── rand_vec.py
│   └── tools.py
│
├── plane_behaviour/
│   ├── plane.py
│   └── clustering.py
│
├── animate.py
├── * simulate.py
├── * image_processor.py
└── utils.py

results/
├── fire_sim.gif
├── processed.npy
└── processed.png

src/
├── real_world.jpg
├── real_world.npy
└── image.png

visualisations/
└── .gifs with varying scenarios


* settings.json
.gitignore
.gitattributes
README.md
```


- `simulate.py`: Main script for running the simulation.
- `settings.json`: Configuration file to customize simulation parameters.

## Configuration (settings.json)

Modify the `settings.json` file to control the simulation's behavior:

- **Simulation Settings:**
  - `quality`: `"low"`, `"medium"`, or `"high"` for different grid resolutions. Corresponding to $100\times100$, $200\times200$ or $300\times300$ respectively.
  - `time_steps`: how long you want the simulation to run.

- **Environmental Settings:**
  - `fire_probability`: Probability of fire igniting on each grid cell. If your simulation includes a plane, note that as your simulation quality increases this probability should decrease. Otherwise the plane will dart around with its head loose.
  - `has_rain`: `true`/`false` to include rainfall generated by Perlin noise.
  - `has_varying_densities`: `true`/`false` for 4 varied vegetation densities.
  - `burn_time` and `grow_time`: Arrays specifying burn and growth rates for 4 of the vegetation densities. If `has_varying_densities` is `false` then the simulation takes the first value from each list.
  - `wind_direction`: Options include `"N"`, `"S"`, `"E"`, `"W"`, `"NW"`, `"NE"`, `"SW"`, `"SE"`.

- **Image Settings:**
  - `use_personal_image`: `true`/`false` to load a custom grid from an image file.
  - `image_path`: Path to the custom image.

- **Fire Suppression:**
  - `has_plane`: `true`/`false` to enable or disable the plane.
  - `plane_speed`: The maximum speed of the plane in terms of cells per time step.
  - `plane_radius`: The effective radius of the plane for fire surpression.

**NOTE** By default the simulation uses the image provided in the `src/` directory.


## How to Run

### Personal Image
1. If you'd like to input your own area, head to this link and take a screenshot <a href="https://www.google.com/maps/d/viewer?mid=1OpMoz-v9iOYinQPbBzzx_lBT0QO8h-8&ll=-37.38159633507727%2C148.62546596105895&z=10" target="_blank">Forest Fires</a>.
2. Place your screenshot in the `src` directory and title it `image.png`
3. When running the `simulate.py` you will see a plot of your processed image. You can close out of this.
4. Follow the remaining steps.

### Running the simulation
1. Make sure your configurations are as you'd like them in the `settings.json` file.
2. Go to `app/` and run `simulate.py`.
3. You should see plots confirming your simulation. Once you close the plots, the simulation will run.
4. Check for any inconsistencies that may cause errors in the simulation, for example if you've started a fire on top of a river.
5. View your simulation in `results/fire_sim.gif`.

HAPPY SIMULATING!